---
title: "Stuck as a Side Project: Terry Gilliam’s Unfruitful Labor of Love"
layout: post
---

> _This paper was written for the class_ Introduction to Media Programming and Management _at SUNY New Paltz in March of 2013._

Terry Gilliam is quite the intriguing guy. Always an optimist, and a big dreamer, his ideas sometimes overstep the bounds of reality. But his biggest failure so far was no fault of his own. After more than a decade of work, he still has not been able to bring the film of his dreams to life. The Man Who Killed Don Quixote, a movie he attempted to enter into production with in October of 2000, chronicles his version of the timeless classic, reimagined in a modern context. Time and time again, he’s been countlessly dogged by issue after issue with the film, most of which sat completely out of his control. The documentary film Lost in La Mancha showed the struggles he went through the first time around - and when his shooting location is ruined by weather, and his main actor suffers a herniated disc, the film is shelved completely.

One of the more important points I pulled from Lost in La Mancha was just how much Gilliam was like the man he so badly wanted to make a film about. Quixote and Gilliam are both big dreamers with ideas that often lay outside of reality – with Gilliam’s perhaps less so, but nonetheless. Both of them are the atypical heroes of their individual stories - Quixote, in his search to save Dulcinea, his imagined darling; Gilliam, in his quest to make the film of his dreams. And, importantly, neither of them were entirely in control of their own fates. Quixote didn’t choose to go crazy - he simply fell into a personal reality which didn’t mesh with everyone else’s, completely out of his own control. And none of Gilliam’s troubles filming Quixote were really in his control, either; he cannot control the military, or the weather, or injuries due to Jean Rochefort’s old age. The parallels between the two are truly staggering. Their similarities may have something to do with what Gilliam sees in this story – the reason he wants it to get made so badly. Perhaps, within Quixote, he sees a piece of himself. If that were the case, that alone could make this perhaps his most important film ever – one of a sense of self-discovery, of self-analysation.

Gilliam hasn’t been the only one who’s struggled with a film adaptation of Quixote’s story, either – Orson Welles famously worked on his very own up until his death in 1985, leaving his adaptation ultimately unfinished. Perhaps Quixote is cursed to be relegated to merely a twinkle in the eye of the directors who attempt to tackle it. More likely, though, the story of Quixote is one that attracts a certain kind of person to it: one who is very dedicated to their craft; one with, perhaps, a slightly different sense of humor; and, really, one with a predilection for creating wildly interesting, creative, and exciting tales. Both Welles and Gilliam fall under those terms. But Quixote’s tale does not make a recipe for a traditional film. Quixote is almost an anti-hero – he attempts to espouse heroic attributes, but they’re ultimately misguided because he cannot see what is actually in front of him – he cannot see the real world. Welles and Gilliam do. Both of them spent their time working on their films about Quixote amidst the creation of their other films – the ones which would make them money. Their adaptations of the Quixote story are labors of love – the real reason they got into filmmaking in the first place, perhaps.

Since the release of Lost in La Mancha, Gilliam has re-acquired rights to the screenplay for The Man Who Killed Don Quixote and, since 2009, the film has been in and out of pre-production stages. Supposedly, Robert Duvall and Ewan McGregor have been cast in the parts of Quixote and Sancho’s equivalent. Perhaps more interesting is the fact that Johnny Depp, who was originally going to play the part of the modern version of Sancho Panza in Quixote, has left Gilliam’s project and is now set to star in a new version of Quixote done by Disney. It remains to be seen whether that version of the story will suffer the same fate as Welles’s and Gilliam’s, but with big-name funding behind the project, it seems much more unlikely. Although we can tell one thing for sure – it won’t be anywhere near as good as what Gilliam would have done, or, if we can manage to remain optimistic, will eventually get to do someday.
