---
layout: post
title: Spray: The Positive Power of Graffiti Art
---

> _This paper was written for the class_ Composition II _at SUNY New Paltz in April of 2013._

Sometimes, I drive down from my house to the bank of the Hudson River simply to watch the freight trains go by. It’s perhaps strange to think that a piece of art painted in a train yard in San Francisco can make it all the way to New York, but it can happen - on rails. Those who paint art on freight trains know full well that their art will be traveling the continent, and that potential audience is perhaps one of the biggest motivators for them to practice their art. For fans of freight train graffiti art, watching that art fly past them at 50 miles an hour can be a wild, exhilarating experience. But, as much as fans would like to believe otherwise, painting freight trains with graffiti is illegal, and illegal methods of spraying graffiti are starting to become detrimental to the legitimacy of the art as a whole.

In the 21st century, graffiti art has expanded beyond local walls. Just like everything else that its existence has touched, the Internet has taken graffiti from a local sense to a global one by enabling people in faraway places to enjoy art created all over the world (Siegal 1). With this change has also come a change in the majority of people’s stance on graffiti. Graffiti is now more accepted as a legitimate art form than ever, and legal forms of graffiti have begun to spring up, creating burgeoning careers for graffiti artists. People who grew up simply tagging freight trains and the sides of buildings have moved up in the ranks, some having their works displayed in major art museums; others becoming artists for major corporations, creating urban art for advertising campaigns. Unfortunately, though, the transformative nature of our modern society on the public perception of graffiti has not affected everyone. Some progressive city governments are tackling the issue head-on, by providing legal ways for graffiti artists to turn graffiti from a negative influence on their communities into a positive one. However, others are instead taking zero-tolerance policies, out of fears that graffiti can only be a bad thing for cities. In this day and age, that is not something that we can say for sure anymore. All art has a potential to carry a positive message, and with graffiti, more of it has a need to be able to be practiced in a legal way than ever before.

We need more legal avenues for graffiti artists to express themselves, so that they can create their art in a manner that doesn’t break laws. This is primarily because of three reasons. First, the few legal avenues that are currently available for people to practice graffiti are not enough, and some are in danger of being removed in favor of zero-tolerance policies. Second, doing graffiti in a legal way while growing up can turn into promising careers for talented young artists who would otherwise use their talents in a negative way. Finally, having positive, legal ways for people to create graffiti art can help distance it from its negative, polarizing roots, and further the progress of the public perception of graffiti as a legitimate art form.

First, the few legal avenues that are currently available for people to practice graffiti are not enough, and some are in danger of being removed in favor of zero-tolerance policies. One of the avenues that does exist for those who would like to practice graffiti legally is called a “legal wall” or a “permission wall,” where the otherwise-illegal act of painting graffiti is allowed to happen (McAuliffe 523; McGhee 1). These are created in the hopes that the attraction of being able to create graffiti art legally will take artists out of the dangerous situations they usually face painting at night, and turn graffiti from a negative force on communities into a positive one, and in many cases, this works as intended (McAuliffe 523-4). Despite this, however, some governments are reneging on their agreements with their communities and taking zero-tolerance stances on graffiti art. Parramatta, a suburb of Sydney, used to have legal walls but lost them in 2009 after the Australian province of New South Wales took a zero-tolerance stance on graffiti (McAuliffe 529). They were previously used by both young, inexperienced artists, and adult writers who had extensive experience in the scene (528). Some artists travelled a long way to use these walls, calling them “important legal sites in the network of legal graffiti spaces in Sydney” (530-531). The demolition of these walls has removed an important space for Sydney youth to safely learn and practice graffiti art, and damages their ability to turn their hobby into a career as they age into adulthood (532-533). The loss of legal avenues for graffiti artists will unfortunately and inevitably turn them back to the streets. Without a legal outlet for their art, they will have no alternative but to do their art in ways that are unsafe and unconducive to a positive environment. The legal outlets that do exist have the great effect of extrapolating graffiti art out of gang culture and letting it stand on its own. New ones need to be created, and the currently existing ones need to be protected at all costs, to ensure the safety and longevity of graffiti as a legitimate art form.

Second, doing graffiti in a legal way while growing up can turn into promising careers for talented young artists who would otherwise use their talents in a negative way. One of the most notable, of course, is London’s reclusive artist Banksy. Despite the fact that his real identity is unknown, he has exhibited his works in such esteemed museums as the Museum of Modern Art, and he has published a documentary about a fellow graffiti artist, though people are still debating whether or not the events of said documentary are real (Ellsworth-Jones 1). While most of his art is still done under the cover of dark, on buildings he does not have the right to paint on, others have moved their work to mostly- or fully-legal means. One example is a graffiti artist known as “Mear One.” Having begun spraying graffiti art in junior high, he now does studio art for companies such as Walt Disney, Warner Bros., and Interscope Records (Garvey 1). "I was in junior high and I was getting into gangs, the kids I hung out with were smoking crack," he said. "Graffiti gave me something to focus on and get good at doing" (Garvey 1). Many other people who grew up spraying graffiti have used those skills to springboard their education and careers as artists. Without art, some of these kids would have no future. What graffiti art can offer them, potentially, is a way out of that kind of situation, and a path towards a real education and career in art. But, especially in this day and age, it’s important that their interactions with graffiti and the art as a whole are legal, not illegal, and thus the advancement possibilities inherent in graffiti art necessitate more legal options for newcomers to practice it.

Finally, having positive, legal ways for people to create graffiti art can help distance it from its negative, polarizing roots, and further the progress of the public perception of graffiti as a legitimate art form. As sad as it sounds, some people simply have not gotten with the program - they have not yet understood that graffiti is a legitimate, meaningful art form that needs to be encouraged and kindled. One such example is Los Angeles City Councilman Dennis Zine. When the Aaron Brothers art supply store chain ran a promotion called “Artrageous” that was to feature local graffiti artists and give out art kits containing markers and paper, Zine blasted the chain in a letter, saying that they were glorifying vandalism, and they cancelled the promotion, which was otherwise harmless (“Cleaning Up” 1). It would have been a great opportunity to get kids and teenagers more interested in creating and appreciating art, but the words of one important man were enough to get the entire thing cancelled. Thankfully, there are graffiti mural art programs that are helping communities to see the positive sides of graffiti art. Denver is one of the cities that allows owners of private property to authorize artists to paint on their buildings (McGhee 1). Those who have participated in the GRASP (Gang Rescue and Support Project) mural program say that it has reduced the amount of negative graffiti nearby. “Those who help with the murals take a proprietary interest and protect them from vandals,” writes Tom McGhee in the Denver Post. “And when the work is good and the message positive, it helps build a sense of pride in a neighborhood” (McGhee 1). When there is less negative graffiti in a community, the positive street art that exists can be examined on a closer, more positive level, and its better attributes will shine through more easily. Art is a great thing for communities, and it’s something that they need, so when it can be construed in a positive way, that helps reduce the level of stigma around graffiti art as a whole.

Now, while many people understand the legitimacy of graffiti as a viable art form that needs to be nurtured, there are some who disagree that any sort of graffiti can be positive. Opponents of the efforts to elevate graffiti out of poverty say that graffiti is a problem that can only be solved by strict legal means. First, they posit that graffiti art is harmful and is indicative of gangster culture. And, second, they say that graffiti leads to a lower quality of life in neighborhoods where it is prevalent.

First, opponents of graffiti art and culture posit that it is harmful and is indicative of gangster culture. It’s been shown that this is certainly not always the case. Many pieces are simply murals which attempt to beautify the communities that they’re in. And, while some graffiti certainly is quite harmful, notably the graffiti that is committed by gangs, the graffiti art that we have today wouldn’t be possible without those roots. The zero-tolerance policies that are initiated by people with these beliefs of graffiti being always bad have been shown to be harmful to actual artists and property owners. Ypsilanti, Michigan is one of the cities that does not allow property owners to authorize graffiti work on their buildings, as bookstore owner Hedger Breed found out when his desire to preserve a piece of graffiti sprayed on his store was quashed by the city (Mettler 250). “An Ypsilanti ordinance officer [...] explained to Mr. Breed that he would have to remove the graphic per the city’s graffiti abatement law,” wrote Margaret Mettler, “which requires that property owners remove all graffiti from their property at their own expense” (250). While Mettler argues in her paper, “Graffiti Museum: A First Amendment Argument for Protecting Uncommissioned Art on Private Property,” that property owners have a First Amendment right to freedom of expression when it pertains to the land that they own, many city councils, such as New York City and Los Angeles, have zero-tolerance policies that completely prohibit the creation and continued existence of such art (251, 256-258). Taking down graffiti is one thing, but forcing property owners to remove it themselves at their own expense simply adds insult to injury. Forcing property owners to pay for something that they could not prevent is not a tenable or sustainable way of tackling the situation. Engagement of the communities that create the art in a positive, intelligent, and encouraging way is the sustainable method that we need to flush out bad graffiti and bring in good graffiti.

Second, opponents of graffiti art say that graffiti leads to a lower quality of life in neighborhoods where it is prevalent. Again, it has been shown that this is not always true. In fact, in some ways, the exact opposite can be the case, when the graffiti that is present is positive graffiti. As I mentioned in a previous section of the paper, there is a Denver-based group called GRASP, which stands for Gang Rescue and Support Project (McGhee 1). What they do is take sections of the city that are tainted by negative graffiti and paint positive graffiti in the form of murals. What they have noticed is that the new murals reduce the amount of negative graffiti that gets sprayed in the surrounding areas (McGhee 1). “The reason we do murals is it reduces the graffiti in the neighborhood,” said GRASP program assistant Johnny Santos. “I say, 'You want to come in and help me color this in?' Automatically, the kid ties into the mural” (McGhee 1). Permission walls have sprung up around Denver, as well - run by local graffiti groups, they give people the chance to practice and display their art in a safe environment in a way that is positive both for themselves and the community. “The walls are marked clearly as 'permission walls' and are self-managed by graffiti creators,” writes McGhee, “who appreciate the opportunity to see their work as art rather than vandalism. They function as a living, constantly rotating museum exhibit” (McGhee 1). The great thing about this is that, in addition to beautifying these areas by gracing them with legitimate art, as a “museum exhibit,” these permission walls (sometimes referred to as “legal walls”) give graffiti artists a way to expose their art to people who are interested in it without actually doing anything illegal or engaging in unsafe activities. Legal walls are one of the single biggest positive things the graffiti art industry has right now, and they need to be here to stay.

As we’ve seen, the world needs more legal avenues for graffiti artists to express themselves, so that they can create their art in a manner that doesn’t break laws. The ones that do exist work, and we need to defend them from being destroyed, while also working to create new ones. Graffiti art practiced by legal means can result in promising careers for the artists, and these new positive, legal outlets can help separate the modern version of graffiti art further away from its negative, polarizing roots that opponents of graffiti art cling to in order to attempt to shut it down. In addition, bringing positive graffiti art into communities can help stem the tide of negative graffiti in those communities, and this can help increase the quality of life when done correctly.

Legal graffiti works. It’s tenable, and it needs to be here to stay. As one final piece of proof, one of the more successful legal graffiti events came from one of the most unlikely of sources. In June of 2006, Caltrans, the California Department of Transportation, held a legal graffiti event in one of their train yards, giving graffiti artists the opportunity to spray some canvas and show their works to admiring fans of all ages. Called the “First Annual West Coast Graffiti Party,” it showcased the works of many different graffiti artists, such as Marquis “Retna” Lewis, Kalen “Mear One” Ockerman, and Robert "rELAx" Reiling (Garvey 1). These are graffiti artists that have turned their hobbies into careers in art. As Megan Garvey wrote in her article for the Los Angeles Times, the event’s organizer “said that in his permit application he emphasized the need for legal venues for the art.” "Removing graffiti obviously doesn't work on its own," Gamboa said (Garvey 1). And, according to Garvey, the artists who showcased their works at this event “say they believe one way to stop unwanted graffiti is to get businesses to sanction street art.” When someone with ‘street cred’ paints a wall, it deters other, lesser people from spraying in the same area, said Lewis (Garvey 1).

It’s clear that legal walls work, and that we need more of them to stem the tide of negative graffiti. While clean-up efforts of bad graffiti should continue taking place, the walls left in their wake should not be left blank. When good graffiti takes over, the notion of graffiti as a legitimate art form triumphs, and everyone benefits.
