---
layout: post
title: Office culture
---

Sirius XM is a very interesting environment to be a part of in terms of the office culture. Multiple times a day, I see people dressed quite nicely walk past, obviously of some importance. Just as often, though, I see people dressed very simply: a hoodie and jeans, for instance, or a t-shirt and shorts. Even my boss dresses more casually than I do. It’s clearly not an overly homogenous culture: you work within the confines of the dress code set by the departments you work in – or, more likely, you simply wear what makes you feel most comfortable.

About seven years ago, this office was not Sirius XM, but just XM. Then, in 2008, the two companies merged, and workforce cuts ensued, as the need to reduce redundancies arose – the result of two nearly-identical channel lineups coming together into one. The fact that the office I am working in used to be the headquarters of XM Satellite Radio is quite evident – if you look around, there are numerous indicators of the company’s pre-merger past, with posters and personal items abound. Seven years later, there are still computers here that simply only have the XM logo, or the logo that was made immediately post-merger, with both the old Sirius and XM logos simply put side-by-side. Even the logo on the front of the building, at the intersection of Florida Avenue and Eckington Place, is still the XM logo of long ago.

The takeaway from this, as far as I have been able to surmise, is that there are definitely some people that might be attached to their XM past. The XM blood still runs through their veins, so to say. And it’s not far-fetched to say that there would be similar folks on the Sirius side of things, at the corporate headquarters in New York, as well as a neutral ground of those who joined the company post-merger. This is something that, at this time, I’m still learning to navigate.

On the whole, though, the people are awesome. Friendly, always eager to answer questions, and eager to see me succeed. My mentor is a very busy man, and while helpful, I’m also learning that sometimes, instead of asking David a question, I should be asking the David in my head, so to speak. I think that a large part of working within a corporate structure is knowing what your superiors expect of you, so that you can answer your questions yourself before you have them.

The dress is a thing I’m still learning to navigate too. Every day so far, I’ve been dressing business casual, because I haven’t worked up the gumption to dress more casually yet. One of these days, though, I’ll manage to walk in in a polo and jeans. I sure won’t be the only one.