---
layout: post
title: "Future in the Mind: Ethics of a New Way to Connect"
---

> _This paper was written for the class_ Digital Media Content & Technology _at SUNY New Paltz in May of 2014._

Fifteen years ago, I wouldn’t have imagined in my wildest dreams that I would be lying on my bed at 3 in the morning, watching a concert being streamed live over the Internet from Tokyo, while I write a research paper in my web browser. The times have changed, though, and technology has changed with them. New technologies have irreversibly altered the way in which we transmit and receive information, communicate with each other, and create new journalistic and artistic works. Smartphones, laptops, tablets, and the myriad of other ICT devices that have come and gone over the years have made it ridiculously easy for the average person to do these things in ways that, 20 years prior, they only could have imagined. In the end, though, the future of yesteryear is quickly becoming the realities of today, and new futures are sprouting out of the imaginations of our best and brightest technologists that the rest of us can only dream about.

One of these futures envisions a world where we no longer need to carry around laptops, smartphones, or tablets. It’s strange to think that, someday, these devices which we are so dependent on will become obsolete and fade out of the public consciousness. In this future, though, there’ll be no need to carry around a bulky device if everything you need out of a laptop or smartphone is right inside your head. This vision of the future involves a new kind of neural implant that involves placing an entire computer inside your head, with which you can interact just by thinking – and someday, with the right technological innovations, that very thing will be possible.

In a big way, this isn’t even science fiction: brain implants are a real thing that have been in use for quite some time now. Current brain implants can help patients deal with neurological disorders, treat depression, and even eliminate symptoms of Parkinson’s disease (Brandom). But these devices aren’t perfect. Even though over 100,000 people are currently living with these “deep brain stimulation” implants, scientists still don’t entirely understand how or why they work, and powerful magnetic fields, such as those given off by MRI machines, can disable these devices, causing havoc for their users (Brandom). It’s clear that we still have a lot to learn about the brain, and about these current devices, before we move on to making the neural implants of the future.

When they do get here, though, what will they be like? Will I be able to write research papers just by thinking? Will I be able to think a message to a friend instead of typing or speaking it? All of these are good questions - but instead of conjecturing about how we’ll actually use the technology, I’d like to explore just a few ethical considerations that the world will need to consider when this technology finally becomes more than just a dream in the heads of people like Ray Kurzweil. First off, I’ll be thinking about this technology from the perspective of an educator. Finally, I’d like to explore what the invisibility of something that’s implanted in the brain might bring to the world.

What if brain implants could make a person impossibly smart? Imagine a future where everyone on the planet remembered everything they ever learned, and could recall that information in perfect state in an instant. What impacts would this have on education? With today’s constantly-shrinking SSD technologies, we can store data in solid-state form in incredible densities. I can carry around 128 GB of data on a chip the size of my thumbnail. Imagine how dense that storage will get by the time this brain implant technology emerges – you could potentially store terabytes of data in your head. In a world where everyone can know everything instantly, what else will there be to learn?

Even if nearly limitless information recall doesn’t pan out, though, there are plenty of other ethical considerations when it comes to the world of education. Will students use these invisible devices to cheat on tests and collaborate on homework surreptitiously? Think of a professor calling on a student to answer a question in class. Would that student be able to look up the answer using their implant? It’s possible, of course, that they would. The logical reaction on the education establishment’s part, then, would be to enact some sort of limit on their ability to use that lookup function during class time. It’s possible, even, that laws would be created about this, and that a student’s ability to research information during class could be restricted not by the educator, but by the government. How would this sort of restriction be implemented? If it directly interferes with the operation of the implant, there are concerns regarding the human here – is the government making the student less of a person? There may be privacy implications to think about, too.

Will students even have to read textbooks or sit through lectures anymore, or will their neural implants automatically dump the knowledge they need to know into their brains? Could this technology even make the whole idea of going through the rigors of getting a real education obsolete? There are some for-sure benefits to this, of course – in a world where nobody needs an education, we could all get right to work right away. There would be no shortage of workers for jobs requiring mental skill, as anyone would be able to learn these skills with little or no effort. A world where every person has the credentials for every job could get tricky, though. Could this result in the biggest unemployment levels we’ve ever seen?

I think, instead, that there is a much simpler solution to all of this. Why can’t they simply limit the use of the implants to people who have graduated college, or to people who are over a certain age? This would for sure eliminate the educational concerns above, and in the workplace, implants like these would only help people better do their jobs. A world in which people have to get used to doing things themselves first seems like a world where people will have more respect for the implants and what they can do.

Finally, I’d like to discuss the fact that these implants are, for better or for worse, entirely internal. The invisibility of these devices to outside observers means that there’s no way to tell if someone is using one, or even who has one. This brings up a number of ethical concerns. For our first, we don’t even have to look particularly far into the future. There are a number of parallels between this implant device and our current Google Glass technology. Glass’s built-in camera means that people can photograph or record their surroundings with a tap of a finger, but some citizens have taken this the wrong way. Though Glass provides a light that shows that it’s recording, many people don’t know this, and think they have no way to tell whether a Google Glass user is surreptitiously recording them or not. This has resulted in a widespread backlash against users of Google Glass. Some users of Glass have had their devices stolen or destroyed, and anti-Glass people have come up with a new term, “glasshole,” to describe Glass users (Russell).

Of course, a lot of this has to do with perception. If only the anti-Glass people understood the technology, they would not be as concerned about surreptitious recording. In the future, though, we might have brain implants that can take pictures and record video and audio using our actual eyes and ears. Of course it’s not ethical to record video without everyone knowing you’re doing so – so how will this be disclosed? Will people be able to tell who has these implants and who doesn’t? You’d have to, or the consequences could be dire. Imagine a world where half of the adult population has cybernetic implants that can surreptitiously record audio and video, but you don’t know who does, and you don’t know when or if they’re recording. Who would you trust? This technology, if treated wrong, could bring about the largest mass panic attack in the history of humanity.

Like the educational aspect, there will likely be laws governing this, and there is always a possibility that governments will be able to control your ability to record in certain areas. This could have dire implications for the idea of privacy as we continue into the 21st century. The idea of a government that not only can watch what you do, but also knows what you’re thinking at all times is frightening. Speaking of that, what if the government could turn on your internal camera and use you to watch other people? There are so many possibilities for this technology to be used in a malicious manner, it’s scary.

It’s clear that, as we progress into these new imagined futures, we have to think long and hard about these issues. Transhumanists may love these potential technologies and all that they stand for, and I agree that, in general, they will be a good idea because of everything they’ll enable us to do. At the end of the day, though, these issues won’t simply go away. Transhumanists want to change almost everything about the human condition – they want to use technology as antidepressants, colonize space, and extend our life spans far past what we’re used to today (Bostrom). Some of these technologies are farther away than others, but real progress is being made on the implants: the Pentagon itself has committed to spending $70 million on research into further evolutions of current brain implant technology, and expects to have new devices available within the next 5 years (Gorman). When it comes to brain implants, the future is looking bright – now we just have to keep that light shining.
