---
layout: post
title: Goals
---

My first month at Sirius XM has been a whirlwind experience. Every day, I’ve put together work which ends up on the air the next day, and have been doing work that really contributes to the well-being of the channels I’m responsible for. In my time here, I’ve also gotten to see and do many neat things. I’ve had opportunities to talk to a number of different people in various levels and areas of the company on their time here. I’ve also sat in on a live broadcast of The Maggie Linton Show, a talk show that airs on Sirius XM Urban View, and have had the pleasure of seeing a number of musical performers come to be interviewed by my boss and play in our Performance Studio.

From here on out, there are still a number of things I want to accomplish. One of the great things about being part of an organization like Sirius XM is the ability to be so close to so many different channels, and thus so many different kinds of programming and presenting. One of my goals in my time here at Sirius XM is to glean some insight into the ethos and the philosophy behind the way that channels and shows of different genres are programmed and presented. Part of this I have already achieved by sitting in at the Maggie Linton Show. Soon, I will also be spending time with members of the Sirius XM U team, as well as speaking with members of the teams responsible for the electronic music channels. There is also a possibility that I will sit in on a recording of the Joe Madison show.

Another goal that I would like to achieve in my time here would see me get deeper into the conception of a classical music radio program. I will be sitting with Robert Aubry Davis, one of our channel’s presenters, to watch him record his mic breaks (which we call voicetracks) and learn more of the theory behind how he presents. I will then take a program of music and record voicetracks for that program, using my voiceover skills along with the things I have learned about what makes a good classical music on-air presentation. The goal is to create something of the same level of quality that would be expected of our regular on-air presenters.

My final goal is much longer term. It extends well outside the bounds of this internship program, and really has more to do with my future career, but this is where it starts. Sirius XM is providing me with a learning environment in which I can learn about the innards of the radio industry, but also skills that I can then take and use to improve my own personal work outside of the company. If I want to extend my radio show, Drifts, into something that could be considered a career, I will need to use everything I learn here about programming, presentation, and professionalism to further hone my craft so that I can create something that is truly special.
