---
layout: post
title: 'From the Trenches: Sirius XM'
---

Sirius XM is an absolutely giant organization: one of the largest radio companies in the world, its headquarters span across multiple buildings in two cities, and have people working on not just music, but innovative talk and sports programming, along with new services aimed at real-time traffic and weather updates for cars. When it came time to sit down and talk to a few people here at the company and learn about themselves and their careers, the breadth and depth of the company’s offerings told me that I should also seek that same breadth in my choice of interview candidates. While I did interview someone who I work with on a daily basis, I also looked far outside that scope, and interviewed people who work in our performance studio and in HR, respectively.

First, David Srebnik is the Program Director of Sirius XM’s Classical music stations, and I report to him while working at Sirius XM. Over his nearly 30 years working in the field of radio, he has not only been Program Director of numerous locally-focussed classical music stations, but has also created and run his own interview syndication service called Virtuoso Voices. I interviewed him about all of that and much more.

I also interviewed Shelley Colon, the Director of Employee Relations for Sirius XM. I wanted to be able to get an HR perspective because this organization is so, so much larger than any I’ve worked in before, and I wanted to be able to get a peek into the glue that keeps all of the company’s various groups and personalities working together smoothly. 

Finally, I interviewed Jack MacInnis, who heads up the operations of the Sirius XM Performance Studio here in DC. Jack is unique for many reasons, but especially so because he’s been with the company since its inception almost 15 years ago, pre-merger, and has worked in more than one area of the company in that time.

One thing that surprised me was that, out of all of the people that I interviewed, none of them originally wanted to go into the radio field straight out of college. Even David, who’s been in the industry for nearly 30 years now, originally had dreams of being a professional clarinet player. When that didn’t work out, his father recommended he go into radio, which gave him a way to continue putting all of his vast knowledge of classical music to good use. Jack himself studied music at Berklee, but ended up being a studio technician for CNN after he realized that doing music alone wasn’t going to pay the bills. He only ended up at XM because he heard about it through a news story back in 2000 that saw Honda investing a lot of money into what was, at the time, an unknown company. Before Shelley started at XM, she only knew that she wanted to work in an emerging field with job responsibilities that were flexible and open. Satellite radio, and thus XM, turned out to be a perfect fit. 

David has been Program Director for the whole four years that he's been with Sirius XM, so his way up the ladder happened over the course of his entire career. He started in radio by doing internships with the Voice of America shortwave service, and radio stations KFAC, a classical music station in Northern California, and at KCRW, a world-renown eclectic radio station based in Santa Monica, California. From there, his first paying gig was at a station in Kilgore, Texas called KTPB, where he was the disk jockey for their morning program of classical music. From there, he has been Program Director at a number of other stations across the US, and even briefly spent time at NPR.

In her time with the company, Shelley’s had a number of different jobs in HR here at Sirius XM, all culminating in getting her current title as Director of Employee Relations. She says that one of the most important traits of people who work their way up the ladder quickly is that they’re open to trying anything, to doing any work that needs to be done, and to do that work without asking for more money first. The money will come, she says, when you do a good enough job. That has been her experience in the time she’s worked for Sirius XM.

Jack has also worked a number of different jobs over the span of his career. After his time as a studio technician for CNN, he took his knowledge of satellite broadcasting and brought it to XM Radio. Here, he could put his knowledge to good use while doing something a bit closer to his earlier, musically-inclined aspirations. He started off as a shift supervisor in the Enterprise Control Center, a spacious room reminiscent of the command deck of the Starship Enterprise, from where every station in the building is monitored and broadcast out to the satellites. His shift into working in the Performance Studio came almost by accident. In a conversation with an executive, he mentioned some work he did on the side, composing and mixing music for Discovery Channel’s Shark Week. The executive was so impressed with the work that Jack was made head of the then under construction Performance Studio team. In the end, he got his dream job - if by a roundabout and almost accidental way.

Over the last 10 years, the radio industry has seen some major shifts. One of those was the advent of satellite radio itself - a shift that propelled the industry into a new age. Since then, however, more and more innovations have come about that have continually turned the industry on its head year after year. New internet-based platforms such as Spotify and Pandora, along with the advent of the music blog, mean that all consumers, whether into the traditional classics or looking for the next great thing, have plenty of ways to consume music, and many of those avenues are free of charge. This provides Sirius XM with some very stiff competition.

David, however, when looking at the classical music side of the radio business, says that in his eyes, things haven’t changed enough. He sees a need to make things more accessible for listeners who are new to the genre, and the work he does with his channels Symphony Hall and Pops embodies that idea. In that vein, the continued evolution of classical music radio best practices is also necessary throughout the industry, to modernize these stations for tomorrow’s listeners.

Sirius XM is currently quite financially stable, but as it continues on into the 21st century, it will see a list of changes that will help keep it relevant amongst the vast competition it faces. It’s clear that the trend in music entertainment is shifting towards providing content in the most convenient way for the consumer. Spotify and Pandora offer on-demand functionality that enables listeners to hear the artist they want, when they want. Sirius XM will begin offering that functionality in the near future, and doing so will help keep the company able to compete with these smaller but more innovative competitors. This addition of a “pull” model, along with Sirius XM’s panoply of exclusive content, created in-house, is what will keep subscribers paying their monthly fees. Shelley thinks that this will change Sirius XM into a new kind of company - not a radio company, per se, but a new kind of “audio entertainment” company that can compete outside of the shackles of traditional radio’s static, “push”-only content.

All three of my interviewees offered me some advice for working my way into a good career, but I think that you can glean the most important insights just by reading in between the lines of their responses and career stories. For one, it’s very important to be open to anything. It’s great to have a game plan for your dream job, but it’s important to know that that’s far off for most people. On the way up the ladder, you have to be open to working jobs that are outside your industry, even if they’re only tangentially related - Jack’s story shows this in spades. In addition, Shelley’s story tells us that you should never say no to a project. The skills you will learn by trying new things outside your job description will almost always be useful to you later on, and showing that initiative is exactly what your superiors will want to see. Personally, I know exactly what my dream job is, and though I don’t know whether I’ll get there or not, I do know that I’ll have a blast trying to.