---
published: true
layout: post
title: "Another Tale: How Undertale Subverts Everything You Thought You Knew About Video Games"
---

> _This piece was written for the class_ Media Research Methods _at SUNY New Paltz in October of 2015._

When you think of video games, what’s the first thing that comes to mind? Is it violence? The overwhelming desire to defeat some sort of enemy? The vast majority of mass-market, AAA-developer video games typically have the defeat of an enemy as the win condition – whether it’s a first-person shooter like _Call of Duty_, or another type of adventure-based role-playing game, like _The Elder Scrolls V: Skyrim_. Even recent Nintendo games, like _The Legend of Zelda: Skyward Sword_, involve sword-based gameplay, while one of their latest games, _Splatoon_, is their first foray into the FPS (first-person shooter) world, asking colorful squid-like characters to shoot “ink” out onto the playing field to capture territory and kill enemies. Big budget titles like _The Witcher III: Wild Hunt_ or _Mass Effect_ merge this gameplay with engrossing stories on the same (or higher) caliber as many popular television shows and movies.

A small number of other games eschew this violence in favor of different styles of gameplay. An early example of the puzzle game genre is _Tetris_, which involves filling a grid with different shapes called _tetrominoes_, with the goal of clearing lines and avoiding filling the grid up past the top. Even more recently, _Minecraft_, which has become a sensation among players as young as 5 and as old as 95, makes the violence completely optional – while monsters and fighting exist, you can turn off those monsters and simply focus on exploring and building out a blocky, procedurally-generated world.

The traditional computer-based role-playing game grew out of ideas brought by pen-and-paper RPGs like _Dungeons and Dragons_ – the player will act out some role, or roles, in a fantasy world that has already been built out for them. The _Final Fantasy_ series, for example, typically saddles you with three to five characters who travel and work together with the purpose of defeating some kind of evil. The _Elder Scrolls_ series has even deeper roots in the traditional, pen-and-paper based role-playing game world, but today has grown into a multi-million selling franchise with its latest incarnation, _The Elder Scrolls V: Skyrim_. That game has sold more than 20 million copies as of January 2014, making it one of the best-selling video games of all time (Peckham, 2014).

_Undertale_, a new role-playing game for PC and Mac released just over two weeks ago, is not one of the top-selling video games of all time. It also wasn’t made by a huge, AAA developer – it was made by just one person, Toby Fox. In his words, _Undertale_ is “[a] traditional role-playing game where no one has to get hurt” (Fox, 2013). That probably sounds antithetical to the entire premise of a role-playing game – what good is an enemy if you can’t defeat it? The answer to that question is complicated – this is a very interesting game which is anything but “traditional.” _Undertale_ deftly subverts the traditional tropes of the role-playing game and uses aspects of feminism to create something completely new.  This paper will expose three facets of this game through a feminist lens – the game’s player character, the game’s battle system, and, finally, the game’s story.

One of the first things you do in most role-playing games is choose a name for your player character. In that aspect, _Undertale_ is no different. Unlike the traditional modern RPG, however, you don’t get any choices past that point. Today’s typical RPG lets you thoroughly customize your character’s appearance, and in the early to mid-2000s, many started letting the player choose the gender of their character for the first time, a choice which mostly persists to this day. _Undertale_ does not let the player choose the gender or appearance of their character. Instead, the game cleverly sidesteps all of this choice by providing a single, very androgynous player character. The sprite is ambiguous in both gender and age, though most fan-art portrays the player character as a child. The traditional console- and PC-based role-playing games of the 1980s and 1990s featured primarily male protagonists. Many early games, such as _Super Mario Bros._ and _Dragon’s Lair_, task a male player character with saving a “damsel in distress” – princesses, in both of those cases. _Undertale_ doesn’t abide by those patriarchal standards – it sidesteps them entirely, and in the process, gives both the in-game player character a distinct identity, as well as allowing the player, whoever they may be, the chance to see something of themselves in that character.

From there, _Undertale_ throws you almost immediately into the battle system. The battle system is probably the game’s biggest gimmick – as the creator’s description of the game states, “no one has to get hurt.” You are not forced to fight enemies. Instead, you can talk to them, and once you find other, non-combative ways to make them not want to fight you, you can “Spare” them, ending the battle without having to “defeat” them in the traditional sense. Now, these enemies will fight you – even though the game says that “no one has to get hurt,” you will get hurt a lot – and, if you want, you can fight back. You don’t have to, though – it’s possible to complete the entire game without defeating a single enemy. Looking back, this seems like such an obvious evolution of the RPG system that it is a wonder why it hasn’t been tried in other games before, but it’s a testament to Fox’s mind that he took this idea and executed on it so well. The game doesn’t shield you from the fact that violence exists – or that it hurts – but it does give you the opportunity to decide not to participate in perpetuating it, and from that perspective, it only looks like a good thing.

_Undertale_’s story, too, is directly influenced by the class- and race-based oppression that feminism often finds itself concerned with. In the story of the game, “two races ruled over Earth: HUMANS and MONSTERS.” After finding themselves at war with each other, the humans win, and seal the monsters underground “with a magic spell.” Our player character finds themselves underground after climbing Mt. Ebott, of which it is said that those who climb it never return (Fox, 2015). Your appearance underground, then, causes fear in those who realize that you’re human. From the monsters’ perspective, the humans are the oppressors – the roles are reversed. This is part of why the game’s unique battle system, and other underlying game systems, are so important – it gives you the chance to differentiate yourself from the humans that caused the monsters so much suffering and pain. Another thing that the game does that most don’t is remember every decision you have made. The short length of the game (it can be completed once in about 6 hours of time) encourages multiple playthroughs, and remarkably, the game remembers every single choice you make over every playthrough you complete, causing some in-game characters to remember things you did in previous playthroughs. There are multiple endings to be seen, and players are encouraged to complete both “pacifist” and “genocide” runs of the game in order to see all the content the game has to offer. This creates a bit of a dichotomy between playing the character in either a peaceful or tyrannical manner – and, of course, it’s certainly possible to integrate aspects of both sides into your playthrough.

The best thing about _Undertale_ is how it gives you a choice. It’s the first video game to do what it does on any sort of scale, and in addition to that, it’s legitimately funny, has charming 16-bit graphics and a brilliant score by Toby Fox himself (he’s also known for contributing significant musical work to the mixed-media webcomic _Homestuck_). It’s clear that he thinks differently to the AAA developer – this is a game that no big software house ever could have made, but the things those developers will learn from playing this game will certainly impact the industry in numerous ways over the next few years. It’s an incredibly ambitious set of accomplishments for being the first video game he’s ever made, and it’s currently sitting on Metacritic’s #1 spot on the Best PC Games of All Time (Metacritic, 2015). That’s saying something.
